## Case studies

Below we show some directories containing example code generated by the tool.

### `case-studies/examples/`
Demos that are generated by the script `./generate.sh`. 

It contains the generated sources for a couple of different signatures.
You can issue `make` in this directory to have Coq compile all the files. 

### `case-studies/tapl-exercise/`
This directory contains the case study we implemented for exercise 23.6.3 of TAPL.
You can issue `make` in this directory to have Coq compile all the files.

### `case-studies/kathrin/coq/`
This directory contains a subset of the case studies by Kathrin Stark from https://www.ps.uni-saarland.de/~kstark/thesis/
Several metatheorems are proved, mostly about the simply typed lambda calculus and variations of System F.
The files are adapted to be compatible with Coq 8.13.

We generate the languages for the cases studies using Autosubst OCaml with mostly functional extensionality disabled (see the ./generate.sh script).
Only Chapter6/variadic_fin.v uses functional extensionality because the language is defined with the codomain functor which needs the axiom.

The generated files are the following

| `Chapter3/`    | `Chapter6/`     | `Chapter9/` | `Chapter10/` |
|-------------|--------------|----------|-----------|
| utlc_scoped.v | utlc_pairs.v   | stlc.v     | sysf.v      |
| utlc_pure.v   | sysf_cbv.v     |          | sysf_pat.v  |
|             | variadic_fin.v |          |           |

You can issue `make` in this directory to have Coq compile all the case studies.

In Chapter10/POPLMark{1,21,22}.v we print assumptions in the end to show that they do not rely on funext anymore.
But with the caveat that in POPLMark{21,22}.v we assume another axiom to prove a morphism for the pat_ty predicate.
The predicate is defined as a Variable, so there seems to be no other way since we have no extra knowledge about pat_ty.

